[Music]
controls are still offline sir override
[Laughter]
why is this collapsing star giving off
this like
glowing lumpy asteroid thing
oh god i love the 80s so much
all right so i have a little bit of a
confession
to make and that is that i've never seen
any
of the original star trek series i know
i know and i call myself a massive
sci-fi fan
as well i just i mean i've always been
more of a star wars gal what can i say
now i have seen the films with chris
pine and emma which i
enjoyed a lot which i don't know if that
redeems me
in the eyes of all the trekkies watching
or not
but i figured time to redeem myself it's
streaming on netflix now we're in lock
down here in the uk so there is
no better time for me to start watching
them and also i figured you know
i should record my reaction as well as
an astrophysicist 100 inspired
by dr mike's doctor reacts series i
found that through my obsession with
grey's anatomy and i thought it'd be
you know something fun to do over here
as well and this is not sci-fi bashing
in any way i'm very aware
that you need the fiction part to make
it science fiction and that's what makes
it fun i'm just kind of reacting in the
sense of okay if these programmers were
bound by the real laws of physics
then how would it be different
so without any further ado let's get
into this this is me reacting to
star trek the next generation season 1
episode 2
the naked now
[Music]
captain's log stardate 41209
we are running at warp 7 to rendezvous
with the science vessel s.s
sielkovsky which has been routinely
monitoring the collapse of a red
supergiant star
into a white dwarf hang on okay so
we've already got some astro happening
here and it's not even like 20 seconds
in
so uh he just said that they are looking
at this star
apparently a red supergiant star that's
going to collapse into a white
dwarf red supergiants don't collapse
into white dwarfs they collapse into
neutron stars it's
just the plain old red giants that
collapse into white dwarfs so that's
anything that
when it's a normal star it's something
from like half the mass the sun to eight
times the mass of the sun will become a
red giant and then a white dwarf
anything bigger so like eight times the
mass of sun to say like
thirty or so times the mass of the sun
that's gonna become a red supergiant
star and then collapse into
a neutron star and it just all depends
like how
big the normal star is when it's happily
turning hydrogen into helium through
nuclear fusion
in what it becomes at the end of its
life and i guess here they just
thought that red supergiant sounded more
impressive
than just red giant but it's the kind of
thing i'd expect a program like star
trek to get right
now reveal no life science abort captain
yeah so so this is the thing so red
giants red supergiants both of them
they're just really
unstable stars right they're at the end
of their life they've not got a lot of
fuel left they're basically hanging on
for as long as they can
and trying all the tricks in the book to
like you know instead of fuse
hydrogenated helium they're fusing
helium into heavier elements and carbon
and heavier elements and so
they're really unstable they tend to
pulse as well they're not like sort of
static like you see here
and also they're throwing off a huge
amount of material into space in what we
call like a stellar
wind it's just sort of streaming off it
and they're incredibly incredibly hot
too so
i don't know how close you'd actually be
able to get like i don't
think you'd be able to get this close to
a red giant star
but yeah maybe this this star's more
stable
maybe that's why they've been able to
monitor it i'll just keep watching
oh i really like this opening like
flying past all the planets
yeah there's something something that's
my favorite
space the final frontier
these are the voyages did you see that
though though how the
foreground stars moved with respect to
the background stars that's really cool
that's something we call
parallax so i'm really glad that they
actually put that in
the opening sequence because that was
one of the first ways that we were able
to calculate distance
to to stars in our nearby universe so
if you think about how we move in our
orbit on earth around
the sun right so our perspective on
stars changes and so
you see like foreground stars that are
closer to you
move with respect to the background
stars whether you look at them you know
from from winter on one side of the sun
when you're on the other side of the sun
in summer you look at them and see them
from a different angle
and so then it's just like some really
simple like trigonometry like what you
learn at school
to work out the distances to stars that
are nearby and so it's really cool that
they put that in the
opening sequence you know that's a
that's a little detail
that i that i appreciate
to boldly go where no one has gone
before
and then they make the jump to warp
speed light speed hyperspeed whatever
they call it in star trek right like
just to point out that under our current
understanding of the laws of physics
nothing can go faster than the speed of
light it's incredibly difficult to
accelerate
something even close to the speed of
light you need an incredible incredible
amount of energy
the things that we can currently do it
with are you know tiny particles like
protons
in these incredible particle
accelerators like the lhc
at cern so i think we're a long way off
from
ships like that that can travel at those
those huge huge speeds
unfortunately we are downloading the
research information gathered on the
collapsing star nearby
i am concerned of being in such close
orbit but that ziyakovsky's research
records will no doubt predict the time
of the star's final collapse
okay so magneto is as concerned as i am
about their relatively close orbit to
this star that makes me feel better but
one thing he said there about
predicting like the time that the star
will collapse i mean
maybe in the future if you're studying
it this close this close in orbit you
might be able to get at that detail but
like stars
spend anything from thousands of years
to
millions of years in these red giant
phases before they become white dwarfs
so like pinpointing a time that that's
gonna happen is
pretty difficult you know like the best
thing you can say is that it could be
tomorrow it could be in a million years
like look at beetlejuice for example
beetlejuice is a red supergiant star
coming to the end of its life
it could go supernova and become a
neutron star any day
we've been saying that for decades now
so
it's anyone's guess i'm getting very
strange reports from all decks
such as such as the ship's training
division ordering all officers to attend
a lecture on metaphysics
out of physics so fun fact metaphysics
is not
actually a branch of physics it's
actually philosophy
and in it they ask questions like you
know how do we exist
why do we exist what does it mean to
exist i've never studied it myself but i
imagine it hurts the brain
a lot more than astrophysicists the
brain anyway
and there was a rather peculiar limerick
being delivered by someone in the
shuttlecraft bay
i am not sure i understand it
there was a young lady from venus whose
body was shaped like
a captain to security come in
oh i'm stealing that one all right
maybe it's mutated but i've got to
isolate it in order to analyze we don't
have that kind of time
you brought diana yes she's infected and
you touched her
oh god and you touched me
wait i'm just quarantine you stop
touching each other stop touching each
other in the workplace
as well like it's not that hard god this
this episode's hitting a little bit too
close to home in 2020.
sir the star is beginning to collapse
so you see how the star changed color
then it went from sort of
a reddish color to a yellowish color
that is actually what would happen
like in real life right if you could
watch this kind of process happening
because it's all to do with what's going
on inside the star itself
in the very core where the nuclear
fusion is happening right you've got
this core of of hydrogen that's been
turned into helium when the star was in
its normal phase and now you've only got
nuclear fusion going on this little sort
of like
shell around the outside where it's
currently hot and it's kind of like an
onion or something right
and so there's this constant battle
between nuclear fusion pushing outwards
with all the energy it produces and then
gravity like pushing
inwards and eventually you use up all of
the hydrogen
whether it's doing helium burning
perhaps as well in that shell around the
outside
and then all of a sudden there's no
energy pushing back outwards again
gravity starts to win
the star contracts a little bit but then
all of a sudden it gets hot enough to
kickstart
more hydrogen or helium burning around
the outside in these shells
again and so you've got this constant
this is where you get this like
pulsing as well but as it contracts
the star gets hotter and so it changes
color it goes from red to yellow because
yellow is
hotter than red which might be weird to
some of you because like you know like
taps have been telling us phrases right
that red is hot
and then like blue is cold but actually
the blue end of the spectrum
of like the color spectrum and blue end
of the rainbow is the hottest
think about it like um you know the
flame on a gas cooker or hob
or in a bunsen burner is blue right but
the flame
on a candle or like the dying embers of
a fire is much more yellowy red
right it's much cooler and so as the
star contracts and get hotter
it will go sort of from from red to
yellow to blue to
white eventually so yeah red is the
colder end of the rainbow and blue is
the hot end of the rainbow
[Music]
alright so this red giant star is now
becoming
a white dwarf right and it's undergoing
collapse as they said
i don't think collapse is necessarily
the right word here i mean they didn't
show a supernova which is right you
wouldn't get a supernova
but collapse isn't right either like i
said these these stars are like
pulsating and they're losing a lot of
their material
all the time to the space around them so
in the sort of however many millions of
years that this star spent in its red
giant phase it probably would have
shedded about
50 up to 70 of its outer layers
of all that gas in into space until
essentially all you're left with
is just the inner helium core left over
from nuclear fusion at the center which
is
the white dwarf and they leave behind
these most spectacular
nebula we call planetary nebula that
just look incredible you can see
you know all the regions around it where
all this gas from these pulsations where
it's ended up with and i think
actually would have been more
spectacular to show on screen
if they decided to show that but i guess
they needed like
immediate danger from the star throwing
off
all of its material and its outer layers
all at once which
would have been more like a typical
supernova but you know you wouldn't have
got a white dwarf at the end you would
have got something like a neutron star
or even a black hole
if you were lucky controls are still
offline sir
override
[Music]
[Laughter]
why is this collapsing star giving off
this like
glowing lumpy asteroid thing
oh god i love the 80s so much
seriously though if this star had
actually you know thrown all its outer
layers off at once it would have done
that in
you know a sphere of gas that expanded
outward it wouldn't have been in some
weird lumpy rock it would have been like
a shock wave traveling through
space but this is science fiction and in
science fiction
apparently collapsing stars do little
glowy asteroid
poops also they said they were in orbit
around this star before right so
if that star collapsed you know the
enterprise's orbit is going to be
massively affected by that it wouldn't
stay there at all you know it would get
flung away
kind of like um you know like a discus
thrower when they spin around and then
they let go of it and it goes off in a
straight line
like if you change the amount of mass
that's in the center by by throwing off
all those outer layers then you're going
to change that gravitational field
enterprise is going to get flung off to
safety probably to be honest
so you know they wouldn't be stuck
around waiting for a big
lump of glowing poopy asteroids
well there you have it my very first
star trek episode
i kind of enjoyed it and at least i'll
get all the wesley crusher references
they make on the big bang theory
now but if there are any other episodes
of star trek either tng
or any other series that you want me to
watch or there are any other sci-fi
programs or films you want me to react
to let me know
down in the comments below oh um netflix
is
about to play another episode and you
know what go on
i'll just watch another one it's fine
a big thank you to this week's video
sponsor brilliant
brilliant is a problem-solving website
with interactive courses on a
huge range of science and maths topics
that get you to learn
by doing whether you want to be more
like data from star trek and brush up on
the principles of logic or maybe you
want to learn more about how we measure
distances with parallax like in the
opening sequence of the next generation
or maybe you want to learn more about
how stars evolve
through normal stars to red giants to
white dwarfs like we just saw in that
episode
well brilliant has got you covered their
courses teach you to work through
problems and get you thinking like a
scientist
in no time so if that sounds like fun to
you and there's something new that you
want to learn
then head to brilliant.org forward slash
dr becky that's
d-r-b-e-c-k-y and sign up completely
for free plus the first 200 people that
go to that link will get 20
off an annual premium subscription so by
clicking on that link you let them know
that
i sent you so go ahead and sign up and
say a
big thank you to brilliant from me
see in case you were wondering this this
is how i focus when i'm alone
in the house with this adorable adorable
cat pillow
oh it does make me laugh that he's
called geordi this character like if
you're in the uk you'll know a geordie
is someone who comes from newcastle and
half my family come from up from
newcastle and i buddy love them and they
all talk like this like
oh jordy man what's wrong with you like
why you sick man
every time they call him jordy that's
all that i can think of